There are different
kinds of playwrights
who make their own plays
due to the urge
of their artistic inspiration.
But there are also
those who are commissioned.
But that doesn’t mean
if you're commissioned,
you’re only doing it for the money.
Eventually, part of the process is
you'll accept the project because
the idea is great
and you can do something about it.
I have something to say using this.
Of course if it’s commissioned,
you have to abide
by the requirements of the company
or the producer
or the company.
Those "Juan Tamad" stories,
where did they come from?
Those are always being used
in films and plays
because we’re very familiar
with Juan Tamad’s story.
Who doesn’t know Juan Tamad, right?
Yes, he’s a folktale character.
There are a lot of stories about him.
So the tendency, usually,
is to create another story
using the character type.
So the character is lazy, but smart.
It’s either he was outwitted
or he was able to outwit them
because he’s lazy.
In Nick Joaquin's
"How Love Came to Juan Tamad”,
he mixed different
Filipino folktale characters.
He made Maria Makiling,
Juan Tamad, and Mt. Banahaw meet
and made a story
like "Midsummer Night’s Dream".
If you’re going to use
Juan Tamad as a character,
should it be based on the folklore?
Yes,
something like that.
Because if you change the name,
the audience might not get it.
They might think
it’s just an ordinary lazy person.
But if it’s Juan Tamad,
it carries everything.
It would refer in some way
or another to a guava
or to other episodes of his life,
with a crab and the like.
- What if there hasn’t been any discussion
in terms of where the adaptation will be based,
like a text or from a
different medium to another,
how do you go about it?
I know there’s no one way
but in your opinion,
have you had any experience
where you adapt either
from a classic to a contemporary
or from a film to a play
or from a play to a film?
If I had a say in it,
the first thing I’d ask is,
is it possible to adapt
to a Philippine setting,
especially if it’s a classic?
If I get excited
with the idea, then I’d do it.
But if not, I won’t.
In fact, for me, the hardest
to adapt are American plays
or even to translate.
Probably because
we also speak English
and we are very exposed
to American culture on television.
So much so that you’d ask,
“Why’d you have to adapt it when
we can already understand the context in English?”
Usually my attitude
when it comes to adapting
is I want to respond to the original.
It’s like setting up...
almost like setting up
some kind of conversation, a discussion
with the original,
which is what I did
with “D’ Wonder Twins of Boac.”
Some people said,
“It’s not Shakespeare anymore,"
"It’s a different play.”
And my response was,
“Yes, of course.”
"That's why the title changed."
Because my response was already
included in the play as I read it.
Adaptation is not merely
the mechanical transferring
from this location
to this location
or translating it
from English to Filipino.
But it’s more of
what do I think about this?
Especially if I have
strong feelings for adapting it,
it’s because I also have
something to add to the idea.
And there are times
when people will say,
"Hey, could you adapt this?”
And when I read it,
I couldn’t adapt it.
It’s difficult.
Might as well translate it.
Translate it as is.
- Will the location be the same?
It’s possible or like what we did
with “The Girl Is A Half-Formed Thing”.
I resisted adapting it
because they wanted
the character to be a Filipina.
It's hard.
"Can't we just make the character
vaguely Filipino and not locate it?"
Because once you locate it,
you’re forced to locate everything.
The sensibilities of the character,
her relationship with other characters,
it doesn’t fit.
So I think that’s one of the things
that a writer who wants
to adapt a work
will have to take into consideration.
Does it blend, sit well?
Does it resonate
to the sensibility of the target...
milieu?
- In terms of influence as a writer,
let’s say you already see
how the production will run.
Do we have a say
if this is not how I visualized it
in so far as
how I prepared the script?
What are the boundaries
separating us as writers
from the director
and everyone else in the production?
It really depends.
There is no...
artistic rule
as much as there are more
political reasons for it.
It depends on your power.
It depends.
If you’re a budding playwright who’s
wide-eyed and enthusiastic,
"I want to see the different
sides of theater",
and then the veteran
Tony Mabesa will be the director,
can you say that to him?
Won’t it be reversed?
If the director comes up to you
and criticizes you,
the only thing you’d be
able to say is “Yes, I see.”
So some other factors come into play
in the production process.
Not necessarily aesthetic.
This could happen
if the main artistic differences
and status of the playwright
and director are almost the same.
But it goes through negotiation, right?
That happens many times
in the Virgin Labfest processes.
Status negotiations
are at play in the process.
Not only in the artistic sense,
but also probably
because the playwright
should also be ready
to defend his work
because it’s assumed
that more than anyone else,
at that particular point
of the rehearsal,
it is the writer who knows more
about his work than anyone.
Not even the director.
Eventually, when the director is done
with the production, more or less,
they’ll have the same grasp
of how the production will go.
I think, maybe at one
point of the rehearsal
the playwright just had so
many other things to do.
When the playwright returns,
the play's different.
There are playwrights who’d say,
“Surprise me”.
And they do get surprised.
We never say,
“Pleasantly surprise me.”
Or dismayed.
That can happen.
But while you have--
Eventually, as different from cinema
where the scriptwriter
has a lot less control over the material
once it is being shot,
the playwright has full control
even after the production.
Why?
Because it can be restaged
by another director.
Right?
That’s why you have more control
and ownership when you’re a playwright.
The most recent one I did was,
of course, “Ibalong,”
which you could
hardly call an epic
but still,
it was based from
a legend about the pride of Bicol.
Not just Naga, but Bicol.
There are a lot of sources
you can get from.
I think one of the more unique sources,
because we’re Filipinos, are our...
traditions and cultural practices
-- although they're fading.
Of course, you’ll face issues
like cultural appropriation.
But you have to weigh
what really matters here.
The community itself
has already forgotten the tradition
as against
you misrepresenting
the community's tradition.
These kinds of issues
will definitely come up.
If you still want to continue,
your assignment is...
to pitch to me three
genres
or three plays
that may have different genres
or three stories
that may have different lengths.
One-act or full-length.
Two-acts.
Or choose a form of a play.
It could be allegorical,
using symbols and the like.
It could be realistic or traditional.
Or simply comedy or tragedy.
Just write a short description of the story
and then let's discuss it
on the forum thread.